=== The Display ===

Symbols appearing on your screen will represent the dungeon's walls, floor,
objects, features, and creatures lurking about.

Firstly, you are represented by the @ symbol.  The colour of this symbol
represents your relative health - white for healthy, through to red for
badly injured.  You'll see at the bottom of the screen your current hit
points (HP) out of your maximum hit points.  If your current hit points
fall below 0, you will die and the game will end.

Creatures around you are usually represented by letters.  You can fight
back at any creature that attacks you through a number of different means.
Firstly, by walking into an enemy creature, you'll automatically swing at
it with the weapon you are currently wielding.  You can use the equipment
command ('e') to see what you are currently wielding and wearing.  
You can also acquire items to throw, bows to shoot with and magical spells 
and devices.  The online text provides more details on how to use these 
various abilities.

Features around you are represented by various types of keyboard symbols.
You can also find objects, which are usually represented by various types
of punctuation.  To determine what anything is from a distance, you can
use the look command ('l' or 'x' on the roguelike keyset).  This will
allow you to look around at grids and examine them in more detail.  Press
ESC to exit the look mode, use the direction keys to cycle between
interesting grids, and the space bar to cycle between items in a single
grid. You can press 'p' while looking to change the mode to allow you to
look at any grid, as opposed to just interesting ones. The 'r' key (for
recall) will allow you to recollect the information you have learned so
far about whatever you are now looking at.

If you prefer graphics, you can use the menus to select a graphical mode.
